## Chapter 1: Bank Business and Capital
- return on capital is the focus of all banking activities
  - coordination of these banking activities is the focus of asset-liability management (ALM)

### Types of income streams and costs
#### Interest income
- AKA net interest income (NII).
- main source of revenue for banks worlwide (% of revenue achieved with this type of income can vary between banks)
- generated from lending activity and interest-bearing assets
  - 'net' income is the return on these interests minus the costs of funding loans 
- funding - a cost to the bank, obtained from different sources
  - deposits (key and cheapest source)
  - senior debt (bonds), securitized bonds
  - money market paper
  - they're short-term or available on demand, so must be supplemented with long-term funding
- sensitive to credit risk () and market risk (interest rate risk of loans and deposits)

#### Fees and commissions
- fees are obtained from providing services to customers
- less volatile and not susceptible to market risk (e.g. trading income or NII) or credit risk (as fees are paid upfront)
- fees provide an opportunity to create a diversified customer base for this additional range of services
- fees are of less concern to ALM
- carries operational risk

#### Trading income
- generated through trading activity in financial products such as equities (shares), bonds and derivative instruments
- most volatile source of income and generates high market risk and credit risk

#### Costs
- staff 
- operations (rent, IT, office equipment)
- provisions for loans losses (charges against the loan revenues of the bank, subjective measurement of how much the borrowing portfolio can be expected to be repaid by the borrower)
  
### Capital Markets
**capital market** - market for raising and investing finance
- in traditional sense, can be where *financial instruments* are bought and sold physically or over the phone/online
- two primary users of capital markets are *lenders* and *borrowers*
  - they have inherently different objectives, which is the source of basic conflict. Lenders want to remain liquid and see high return on their investment. Borrowers on the other hand want to invest their funds long-term to maximise profits. This is reffered to as *constitutional weakness*
- Intermediaries come in-between lenders and borrowers to facilitate the efficient operation of capital markets and bring together their needs.
  - an example of an intermediary is a **bank**
  - a bank will accept deposits from investors (*liabilities*) and lend funds to the borrowers (*assets*). 
  - with a sufficiently large asset and liability base, the bank can meet the needs of both investors and borrowers. It will be able to maintain liquidity to meet investors requirments, and create long-term assets to meet the needs of the borrowers.
  - two risks that arise from these operations: large number of investors decide to withdraw their funds at the same time, or a large number of borrowers go bankrupt and default on their loans.
- corporate borrowers can raise capital in several ways:
  - continued re-investment of the profits generated by the current operations
    - this may not generate sufficient funds considering the operational costs and if the company wants to expland
  - selling shares in the company
    - this dilutes the extend of ownership of the existing shareholders, and they may not be apetite for the shares in the market 
  - borrowing from a bank via loans
    - often inflexible 
    - interest rate may be high, especially for smaller companies
  - borrowing money by issuing debt securities, in the form of bills, commercial paper and bonds 
    - this will fix the rate of interest payable by the company for a long-term period
    - bonds are tradeable, which is appealing to investors
- the most common bond is a loan of funds by the buyer to the issuer of the bond, in return for regular interest payments up to the termination date of the loan

### Scope of banking activities
- activities range from basic corporate lending and more complex decuritization and hybrid product trading
- ALM - mostly concerned with efficient management of banking capital
- for capital management purposes a bank's business is organised into a 'banking book' and a 'trading book'.

#### Capital
- equity of the bank
- cushion which absorbes any unreserved losses that the bank incurs
  - eating into reserves
  - freezing divident payments
  - writedown of equity capital (in extreme cases)
- as per 'Basel Rules', a bank is required to hold a minimum capital level of 8% against the assets on its book
-  total capital is comprised of:
   -  Tier 1 capital (higest quality, core capital)
      -  equity capital 
      -  reserves 
      -  retained earnings
   - Tier 2 (lower quality, not 'loss absorbing', repayable and shorter term than equity capital)
     -  preference share issue proceeds
     -  hybrid capital instruments
     -  subordinated debt 
-  quality of the capital is reflected by the mix of tier 1 and tier 2 capital
- financial strength and quality of a bank is assessed by calculating capital ratios and comparing them with market averages and other benchmarks

### Banking and trading books
- Activities for capital management purposes are split between 'the banking book' and 'the trading book'.
#### *the banking book* 
-  holds more traditional banking activities , such as commercial banking, loans and deposits. This covers lending to individuals, corporates and other banks. 
-  The principle is to 'buy and hold', invest in long-term acquisitions, for even up to 30 years. 
-  Assets and liabilities generate interest rate risk (critical part of Treasury policy and ALM) and credit risk (is set and dictated by the credit policy of the bank). They also generate liquidity (ease with which the bank can transform an asset into cash and ease with which the funds can be raised in the market) risk and term mismatch ('gap') risk (excess or shortage of cash, or fixed rate and floating rate interest liabilities).
-  All these risks form part of ALM
-  The central role of financial markets is to enable efficient cash management and interest rate management.
-  ALM of the banking book will focus on interest rate risk management and hedging and lioquidity management.
-  Although there is no direct 'market risk', interest rate exposure creates an exposure subjected to interest rate movement in the market, thus the banking book is exposed to market risk.
#### *the trading book* - 
- records wholesale market transactions, such as market-making and proprietary trading in bonds and derivatives. 
- Some of the assets are traded and sold off within a day, so short-term investments. 
- It employs a 'mark-to-market' approach to record profit and loss (P&L), which is the daily marking of an asset to its market value. 
- generates market risk, credit risk and liquidity risk. And the need for cash management.
- much of the activity involves derivative instruments (e.g. futures, swaps and options. ), as opposed to 'cash' products. These can be equity, interest rate, credit, commodity, foreign exchange, weather, and other derivatives. They are known as 'off-balance sheet' instruments as they're recorded off the cash balance sheet.
- Off-balance-sheet transactions refer to 'contingent liabilities'. as they refer to future exposure contracted now. They represent a liability that might have to be honoured on a future date. 

### Financial statements and ratios
- fincial statement includes *the balance sheet* and *the P&L account*.
- assets on the balance sheet should equal the assets on a bank's ALM report, while receipt of revenue and payout of costs during a specified period is recorded in the P&L report or income statement.

#### The balance sheet
- statement of company's assets and liabilities as determined by accounting rules.
- snapshot of a particular point in time, and so when produced it is already out of date
- a number of management information ratios are used when analysing the balance sheet
- balance sheets often have similar layout, but they'll differ significantly betwween commercial, investment or retail bank
- There are usually five parts of a balance sheet:
  - lending and deposits (traditional bank business)
  - trading assets
  - Tresury and interbank assets
  - off-balance-sheet assets
  - long-term assets, including fixed assets, shares in subsidiary companies, together with equity and Tier 2 capital
- breakdown of assets and liabilities:

| Assets | Liabilities |
|-------- | ---------- |
| Cash | Short-term liabilities |
| Loans | Deposits |
| Financial instruments (long) | Financial instruments (short) |
| Fixed assets | Long-dated debt |
| Off balance sheet (receivables) | Off balance sheet (liabilities) |

#### Profit and loss report 
- P&L is the income statement for a bank
- shows revenues: net interest income, fees and commissions, and trading income. The ratio of the mix will reflect the type of bank
- revenue is offset by operating (non-interest) expenses, loan loss provisions, trading losses and tax expense
- more traditional commercial bank will have a higher dependence on interest revenues than an investment bank that engages in large-scale wholesale capital market business 

##### Net interest income
- the traditional source of revenue for retail banks
- driven by lending, interest-earning asset volumes and the net yield available on these assets after taking into account the cost of funding
- despite the main focus on the loan book, ALM will also focus on the bank's investment portfolio (including coupon receipts from money market and bond market assets and dividents from any equity holdings).
- the cost of funding is a key variable in generating overall NII. 
- for a retail bank, the cheapest source of funds is deposits, especially non-interest-baring ones (e.g. cheque accounts). Other sources include capital markets (senior debt), wholesale markets, securitized markets and covered bonds.
- Constrained composition of funding can reduce the activities of the bank significantly
- bank NII is sensitive to both credit and market risk. NII is sensitive to changes in interest rates and the maturity profile of the balance sheet. 
  - assets that mature earlier than funding liabilities will gain from rising interest rates
  - assets that mature later than funding liabilities will gain from lowering interest rates
  - in a declining or low interest rate environment, banks may experience a negative NII irrespective of their asset-liability maturity profile.
  - while the investment banks are less sensitive to changes in overall NII expectations due to their lower reliance on NII, their trading book will also be sensitive to changes in interest rates.

##### Fee and commision income
- fee revenue is generated from the sale and provision of financial services to customers.
- fees are non-interest income and separate from trading income
- stable source of revenue
- not exposed to market risk

##### Trading income
- comes from capital gain earned from buying and selling financial instruments (cash and derivative (off-balance-sheet) instruments) and can arise from undertaking market-making.
- Market-making is undertaken to meet client demands and the proprietary business needs of the bank's trading book
- most volatile form of bank revenue and lon-term gains are no guarantee for future gains due to market corrections or making a wrong bet on financial markets
- trading activity was measured using the Value-at-Risk methodology, which replaced duration-based risk measures in 1990s.

##### Operating expenses
- HR costs, premises and infrastructure costs
- Cost is usually measured as a proportion of revenue and with several ratios
  - the return on equity (ROE) measure is the most commonly encountered and it is usually part of bank strategy.
  - the return on assets (ROA) - common measure of performance. 
    - Formula: current income (interest income + fees) * asset value
  - both P&L and above measures are calcualtions of absolute values without adjustments for relative risk exposure

##### Provisions
- some loss on loans and other assets is expected
- provisions are set aside to cover for these losses
- they're a charge against the loan revenues
- the amount of provisioning will vary and the volume of provisions will also be assessed over time

## Chapter 3: The Yield Curve

### Importance of the yield curve
- tenets of banking - dealing in interest rates and credit risk
- understanding the behaviour and properties of the yield curve is an essential part of the ALM process
  - the yield curve captures the current state of term interest rates and also presents the current market expectation of future interest rates
  - the interest rate gap reflects the state of bank borrowing and lending. Gaps along the term structure are sensitive to changes in the shape and slope of the yield curve
  - current and future trading strategy (incl. asset allocation and credit policy decision), will impact interest rate risk exposure and therefore will take into account the shape and behaviour of the yield curve
- the yield curve informs about and indicates the state of a debt capital market. AKA *term structure of interest rates* (albeit it is not correct).
- analysis and pricing activity revolves around the yield curve
- it *describes the relationship between a particular yield and its term to maturity*
  - e.g. plotting bonds against the maturity structure will give us a yield curve
- government bond yield curve - primary yield curve in any domestic capital market
- any debt market instrument can be plotted on the yield curve

### Using the yield curve
- Why use the yield curve?
  - the yield curve tells us where the bond market is trading now.
  - it implies the level of trading in the future
  - a good indiator of the future level of the market
-  Main uses:
   - *setting the yield for all debt market instruments* - the yield curve fixes the price of money over the maturity structure
      - the yields of government bonds from the shortest maturity instrument to the longest set the benchmark for yields for all other debt instruments in the market
      - e.g. if the government 5-year bond is trading at 5%, all other 5-year bonds will be issued with a yield over 5%. The amount above the 5% is called the spread.
      - the issuers of bonds, use the yield curve, to price bonds and other debt instruments
    - *acting as an indicator of future yield levels*
      - bond market participants use it to determine implications regarding the direction of market interest rates (**most important function**)
      - corporate financiers analyse the curve as part of their project appraisals
      - central banks and Treasury analyse it regarding the forward interest rates and inflation levels, to set interest rates
    - *measuring and comparing returns across the maturity spectrum* 
      - portfolio managers use the yield curve to assess relative value of investments across the maturity spectrum
      - the yield curve indicates the returns at different maturity points, hence its importance to fixed interest fund managers
    - *indicating the relative value between different bonds of similar maturity*
      - it helps indicate which bonds are cheap or expensive to the curve
    - *pricing interest rate derivative instruments*
      - the price of derivatives revolves around the curve
      - in the short-term: e.g. forward rate agreements are priced off the futures curve, but futures rates reflect the market's view on forward 3-month cash deposit rates
      - in the long-term: used to price interest rate swaps. And hybrid instruments that incorporate an option feature such as convertibles and callable bonds also reflect current yield curve levels.

### Yield-to-maturity yield curve
#### Yield curve shapes 
- yield-to-maturity is the most common yield curve
  - it is contructed by plotting yield to maturity against term to maturity for a group of bonds of the same class
  - it has one significant weakness that leads to its inaccuracy: assumption of a constant discount rate for coupons during the bond's life at the redemption yield level (we discount all the cashflows of the bond at one discount rate). For convenience, we assume that the interest rates in the future will be same as they are now.
  - this creates *reinvestment risk* - risk that when we reinvest each bond coupon as it is paid, the interest rate at which we invest it will not be the same as the redemption yield on the day we bought the bond. Zero-coupon bonds avoid this risk as no coupon is paid during the life of their bond.
  - hence, zero-coupon yield curve is used in these cases, as the yield-to-maturity curve isn't suitable

### Analysing and interpreting the yield curve
- yield curve can adopt one of four basic shapes:
  - *normal or conventional* - yields are at average levels and the curve slopes gently upwards as maturity increases
  - *upward-sloping or positive or rising* - yields are at historically low levels, with long rates substantially greater than short rates
  - *downward-sloping or inverted or negative* - yield levels are very high by historical standards, but long-term yields are significantly lower than short rates
  - *humped* - yields are high with the curve rising to a peak in the medium-term, and then sloping downwards at longer maturities
- sometimes, it can incorporate a mixture of these shapes
- the very existence of a yield curve indicates that there is a cost associated with funds of different maturities, otherwise we would observe a flat yield curve
- investors require different rates of return depending on the maturity of the instrument they are holding

### Theories of the yield curve
- no one theory can explain the curve, hence the mixture of theories is often used

#### The expectations hypothesis
- suggests that bondholder expectations determine the course of future interest rates 
- two versions of this hypothesis:
  - *local expectations hypothesis* - all bonds of the same class but different in term of maturity, will have the same expected holding period rate of return. So if we hold a bond for 6 months, we'll get the same return no matter what specific bond we buy and irrespective of the term to maturity and yield that the bond has at a time of purchase. The author feels this theory is not always the case. 
  - *unbiased expectations hypothesis* - current implied forward rates are unbiased estimators of future spot interest rates. It assumes that investors act in a way that eliminates any advantage of holding instruments of a particular maturity. This theory states that the long-term interest rate is a geometric average of expected future short-term rates. Expenctations, or views on the future direction of the market, are a function mainly of the expected rate of inflation. 
- *return-to-maturity* version of the expectations theory states that total return from holding a zero-coupon bond to maturity will be equal to total return that is generated by holding a short-term instruments and continuously rolling it over the same maturity period.
- *yield-to-maturity* - another version of expecations theory, states that the perdiodic return from holding a zero-coupon bond will be equal to the return from rolling over a series of coupon bonds, but refers to annualised return earned each year rather than total return earned over the life of the bond.   
- local expectations theory is often combined with other theories to form a complete picture of the yield curve

#### Liquidity preference theory
- intuitively, we feel that longer maturity investments are more risky, therefore demand a higher interest rate (e.g. the borrower goes bankrupt, etc).
- inflation expectation should also be taken into account. For inflation that is anticipated to be stable over time, we'd expect a postive yield curve
  - the expectations theory cannot by itself explain this phenomenon (one would expect flat yield curve for stable inflation conditions)
- theory that considers the risk of longer dated investments (liquidity preference theory) - seeks to explain this positive-shaped curve.
- as mentioned earlier, borrowers want to borrow for as long as possible, while the lenders prefer a short-term investments. The compensation for lending over a long term is considered a premium for a loss of *liquidity* of the lender.
  - longer term investments, while being equal to shorter term investments, have the highest yield
  - this theory states that the yield curve should always be upward-sloping (due to preference for shorter term investments and liquidity)
    - an inverted yield curve could be explained if liquidity and unbiased expectations hypotheses are combined
    - a humped curve could be explained by the mix of the inverted curve with a positive-sloping liquidity preference curve
- liquidity premium - the difference between a yield curve explained by unbiased expectations and an actual observed yield curve
  - due to the fact that sometimes short-dated bonds are easier to transact in the market than long-term bonds
  - difficult to quantify as it fluctuates over time
  - it is a compnsation required for holdig less liquid (shorter term bonds) instruments 
  - the sole exitence of the liquidity premium suggests that longer dated securities provide higher yields
  - this is not consistent with the local expectations hypothesis

#### Segmentation hypothesis
- the *segmented markets theory* suggests that activity is concentrated in certain specific areas of the market and that there are no interrelationships between these parts of the market. The relative amounts of funds invested in each of the maturity spectra causes differentials in supply and demand, which result in humps in the yield curve.
  - the shape of the curve is determined by supply and demand for certain specific maturity investments, each of which has no reference to any other part of the curve
- e.g. banks operate at the short end of the curve (due to focus on daily operations, ALM, regulatory purposes, usually up to 5-years long), while insurance companies and pension funds are active at the long end of the curve. 
  - Not many institutions prefer the medium-dated bonds. This may lead to low yields at both ends of the curve and high yields at the middle of the curve
- each market participant will have preference for specific areas of the curve, and where there is no demand, the yields will be high. The activity of the participants will influence only their area of the curve and exist independently from the other end of the curve
- this theory can explain any shape of the yield curve, bit fits best with the positive-sloping ones.
  - but it can't be used to interpret the curve, regardless of the shape
- bonds with different maturities cannot substitute each other, due to the difference in holding period returns. Thus, markets are segmented according to maturity
- this hypothesis is good to explain certain features of positive-sloping curve but by itself is not sufficient
- *preferred habitat theory* - modified version of market segmentation hypothesis. 
  - suggests that market participants prefer a specific area of the yield curve but they will hold bonds from another market if given a sufficient incentive
    - e.g. banks may hold a longer term instruments if their price falls enough to justify the increased risk
    - higher yields may cause particpants to shift out of their comfort area of the market
    - this theory recognises the flexibility the investors have

#### The flat yield curve
- not explained by conventional theories
- flat curves emerge in response to peculiar economic circumstances
- Nov 1988 (USA) - result of the market's view that long-dated yields would fall as bond prices rallied upwards
- a flat cirve may be more heavily influenced by supply and demand factors than anything else, with the majority opinion eventually winning out and forcing the curve to change into a more conventional shape

#### Future views on the yield curve
- we need to remember that markets are not perfect and frequent anomalies occur that can't be explained by conventional theories
- it is more realistic to assume that a range of factora contribute to the shape of the curve
- low, upward-sloping curve - taken as a sign of environment of cheap money followed by higher inflation and higher bond yields
- high downward-sloping curve - taken as a sign of tight credit period followed by falling inflation and lower bond yields
- inverted yield curves has often preceeded recession
  - investors expect recession and therefore inflation to fall, so the yields of long-term bonds are smaller than short-term bonds. Simultaneously, a reduction in short-term interest rates will affect short-dated bonds, which are then sold off by investors, further raising their yield.
  - negative yield curves - conventionally economic slowdown is expected, sometimes other facts come at play
- there is a lot of information in the curve and its shape is taken into account when forming policy and investment advice
  - also used for future market predictions 
  - useful to consider the curve across different currencies and markets, its position relative to the government bond yield curve
  - rate swap curve analysis for the predictions of future level of short-term interest rates

### The zero-coupon (or spot) yield curve
- plots zero-coupon yields against the term to maturity
- zero-coupon bonds not necessary to construct this curve, we can derive it from a coupon or par yield curve.
  - if zero-coupon bonds are not traded, a spot yield curve is derived from the conventional-yield-to-maturity-yield curve. It is a theoretical zero-coupon (spot) yield curve, as opposed to the observed curve constructed from sctual zero-coupon bonds.
- seen as a true term structure of interest rates because there is no reinvestment risk involved, the stated yield is equal to actual annual return 
- as the observed government bond redemption yield curve is not considered to be the true interest rate, a theoretical spot yield curve is constructed
- *breakeven principle* - using the current interest rates, the return from buying few-year bonds must equal the return from buying the one-year bond and rolling over the proceeds (or reinvesting) for another year
- *boot-strapping* - linking together the implied 1-year rates for each year up to the maturity of the longest dated bond
  - the average rate over a given period is the spot yield for that term
- in the real market, there might be several bonds maturing on the same day, or none. So, we choose the rate which gives the smallest average price error
- the zero-coupon curve can also be calculated directly from the coupon yield curve, for example the bonds would be priced at par and their coupons set to par yield values
- the zero-coupon yield curve is ideal when deriving implied forward rates, when defining the term structure of interest rates and when determining the relative value of bonds trading in the market, and when pricing new issues irrespective of their interest (coupons)

#### Arithmetic
116